.. _alias:

.. meta::
   :description: Documentation of GAMSPy alias (gamspy.Alias)
   :keywords: Alias, GAMSPy, gamspy, mathematical modeling, sparsity, performance

*******************************
Alias: Multiple Names for a Set
*******************************


Sometimes it is necessary to have more than one name for the same set, for example, in models that 
deal with the interactions of elements within the same set.
For instance, in input-output models, each commodity may be used in the production of all 
other commodities and it is necessary to have two names for the set of commodities to specify 
the problem without ambiguity. Example: ::
    
    from gamspy import Container, Set, Alias

    m = Container()
    i = Set(m, name="i", records=[f"i{i}" for i in range(5)])
    ip = Alias(m, name="ip", alias_with=i)

A second name ``ip`` for the set ``i`` is established that can be used instead of the original 
set name ``i``. 

.. note::
    The newly introduced set name may be used as an alternative name for the original set; 
    the associated set will always contain the same elements as the original set. If the alias
    name is not provided, it will be autogenerated.

Besides using the :meth:`Alias() <gamspy.Alias>` constructor directly, one can also use the :meth:`gamspy.Container.addAlias` method 
of the ``Container`` class (which internally calls ``Alias()``): ::

    h = Set(m, name="h", records=range(1, 6))
    hp = m.addAlias(name="hp", alias_with=h)

It is possible to create an alias from another alias object. In this case a recursive search 
will be performed to find the root parent set – this is the set that will ultimately be stored 
as the ``alias_with`` property. We can see this behavior in the following example: ::
    
    from gamspy import Container, Set, Alias

    m = Container()
    i = Set(m, name="i", records=[f"i{i}" for i in range(5)])
    ip = Alias(m, name="ip", alias_with=i)
    ipp = Alias(m, "ipp", ip)

::

    In [1]: ip.alias_with.name
    Out[1]: 'i'
     
    In [2]: ipp.alias_with.name
    Out[2]: 'i'

.. warning::
    If an alias is to be used for the *universal set*, the :meth:`UniverseAlias <gamspy.UniverseAlias>` 
    class has to be used. More about this in :ref:`the-universal-set`.


Typical examples for the usage of aliases are problems where transportation costs between 
members of one set have to be modeled. Example: ::

    from gamspy import Container, Set, Alias, Parameter, SpecialValues

    m = Container()
    i = Set(m, "i", description="plant locations")

    tran = Parameter(
        m,
        description="transport cost for interplant shipments (us$ per ton)",
        domain=[i, i],
        domain_forwarding=True,
        records=[
            ("pto-suarez", "palmasola", 87.22),
            ("potosi", "palmasola", 31.25),
            ("potosi", "pto-suarez", 55.97),
            ("baranquill", "palmasola", 89.80),
            ("baranquill", "pto-suarez", 114.56),
            ("baranquill", "potosi", 70.68),
            ("cartagena", "palmasola", 89.80),
            ("cartagena", "pto-suarez", 114.56),
            ("cartagena", "potosi", 70.68),
            ("cartagena", "baranquill", 5.00),
        ],
    )
    tran[i, i] = SpecialValues.EPS

The parameter ``tran`` is 
two-dimensional and both indices are the set ``i``. The data for the transport cost between 
the plants is given in this symbol; note that the transport costs are given only for one 
direction; for instance, costs are specified from ``pto-suarez`` to ``palmasola`` but not 
vice versa: :: 

    In [1]: tran.pivot(fill_value=SpecialValues.NA)
    Out[1]: 
                pto-suarez  potosi  baranquill  cartagena  palmasola
    pto-suarez       -0.00     NaN         NaN        NaN      87.22
    potosi           55.97   -0.00         NaN        NaN      31.25
    baranquill      114.56   70.68        -0.0        NaN      89.80
    cartagena       114.56   70.68         5.0       -0.0      89.80
    palmasola          NaN     NaN         NaN        NaN      -0.00

The following alias statement introduces ``ip`` as another name for the set ``i``. The parameter 
``mui`` is also two-dimensional and both indices refer to the set ``i``, but this time the alias 
``ip`` is used in the second position. The parameter ``mui`` is defined to contain the transport 
costs from one plant location to the other, in both directions. ::

    ip = Alias(m, name="ip", alias_with=i)
    mui = Parameter(m, domain=[i, ip], description="transport cost: interplant shipments (us$ per ton)")
    
    mui[i, ip] = tran[i, ip] + tran[ip, i]

::

    In [1]: mui.pivot()
    Out[1]: 
                pto-suarez  potosi  baranquill  cartagena  palmasola
    pto-suarez       -0.00   55.97      114.56     114.56      87.22
    potosi           55.97   -0.00       70.68      70.68      31.25
    baranquill      114.56   70.68       -0.00       5.00      89.80
    cartagena       114.56   70.68        5.00      -0.00      89.80
    palmasola        87.22   31.25       89.80      89.80      -0.00

Please note that the domain in the declaration of ``mui`` could be also ``[i, i]``. Only the assignment
statement to ``mui`` requires the alias ``ip`` to represent an assignment over all possible pairs. The assignment ``tran[i, i] = SpecialValues.EPS`` assigns ``EPS`` (a sticky 0) to the *diagonal* of the ``tran`` parameter.