.. _model:

.. meta::
   :description: Documentation of GAMSPy Model (gamspy.Model)
   :keywords: Model, solve, GAMSPy, gamspy, mathematical modeling, sparsity, performance

*****
Model
*****

The model class is used to group equations and label them for solving.
It also allows specifying the problem type (e.g. :meth:`LP <gamspy.Problem.LP>`, :meth:`MIP <gamspy.Problem.MIP>`, etc.),
the sense of the problem
(:meth:`MIN <gamspy.Sense.MIN>`, :meth:`MAX <gamspy.Sense.MAX>`, :meth:`FEASIBILITY <gamspy.Sense.FEASIBILITY>`),
and the objective of the problem.

The general syntax for creating a model is as follows: ::

    from gamspy import Container, Variable, Equation, Model, Sense, Problem

    m = Container()
    z = Variable(m, description="objective variable")
    e1 = Equation(m)
    e1[...] = ... # definition of the equation
    e2 = Equation(m)
    e2[...] = ... # definition of the equation
    
    example_model = Model(
        m,
        name="myModel",
        equations=[e1, e2],
        problem=Problem.LP,
        sense=Sense.MAX,
        objective=z,
    )

.. note::
    In case the name is not provided, it will be autogenerated.

Classification of Models
========================
Various types of problems can be solved with GAMSPy. Note that the model type must be specified before solving. 
The model types are briefly discussed in this section. GAMSPy verifies that the model is of the specified type 
and issues error messages if there is a mismatch, such as when a supposedly linear model contains nonlinear 
terms. Some problems can be solved in multiple ways, and the user must choose the appropriate method. 
For example, if the model contains binary or integer variables, it can be solved either as a :meth:`MIP <gamspy.Problem.MIP>`
or as an :meth:`RMIP <gamspy.Problem.RMIP>`.

========== ==========================================================
Model Type Model Type Description
========== ==========================================================
  LP       Linear Program   
 NLP       Nonlinear Program
 QCP       Quadratically Constrained Program
DNLP       Discontinuous Nonlinear Program
 MIP       Mixed Integer Program
RMIP       Relaxed Mixed Integer Program
MINLP      Mixed Integer Nonlinear Program
RMINLP     Relaxed Mixed Integer Nonlinear Program
MIQCP      Mixed Integer Quadratically Constrained Program
RMIQCP     Relaxed Mixed Integer Quadratically Constrained Program
MCP        Mixed Complementarity Problem
CNS        Constrained Nonlinear System
MPEC       Mathematical Programs with Equilibrium Constraints	
RMPEC      Relaxed Mathematical Program with Equilibrium Constraints
EMP        Extended Mathematical Program
MPSGE      General Equilibrium
========== ==========================================================

All model types are exposed with :meth:`Problem <gamspy.Problem>` enum, but the problem type
can be specified as a string as well.

Also the direction types of the optimization (:meth:`MIN <gamspy.Sense.MIN>`,
:meth:`MAX <gamspy.Sense.MAX>`, or :meth:`FEASIBILITY <gamspy.Sense.FEASIBILITY>`) are
exposed with :meth:`Sense <gamspy.Sense>` enum but it can be specified as a string similarly.

Matches for MCP Models
======================

Mixed Complementarity Problem (MCP) models can be defined as pair-wise complementarities between
variables and equations. The ``Model`` class accepts these pair-wise complementarities via the `matches`
argument in its constructor. ::

    p = Variable(m, type=VariableType.POSITIVE, domain=c)
    y = Variable(m, type=VariableType.POSITIVE, domain=s)
    i = Variable(m, type=VariableType.POSITIVE, domain=h)

    mkt = Equation(m, domain=c)
    profit = Equation(m, domain=s)
    income = Equation(m, domain=h)

    mkt[c] = Sum(s, a[c, s] * y[s]) + Sum(h, e[c, h]) >= 
             Sum(h.where[esub[h] != 1],
                    (i[h] / Sum(cc, alpha[cc, h] * p[cc] ** (1 - esub[h])))
                  * alpha[c, h]
                  * (1 / p[c]) ** esub[h],
                ) + Sum(h.where[esub[h] == 1], i[h] * alpha[c, h] / p[c])
    profit[s] = -Sum(c, a[c, s] * p[c]) >= 0
    income[h] = i[h] >= Sum(c, p[c] * e[c, h])

    hansen = Model(
        m,
        problem=Problem.MCP,
        matches={mkt: p, profit: y, income: i},
    )

You do not need to include equations already provided in `matches` in the `equations` argument.
In addition to this explicit equation, variable matching, some newer matching constructs are also supported.
Equation sequence syntax: ::

    model = Model(m, problem=Problem.MCP, matches={(e1, e2, e3) : v})

This is equivalent to the following explicit syntax: ::
    
    model = Model(m, problem=Problem.MCP, matches={e1:v, e2:v, e3:v})

Variable sequence syntax: ::

    model = Model(m, problem=Problem.MCP, matches={e : (v1, v2, v3)})

This is equivalent to the following explicit syntax: ::

    model = Model(m, problem=Problem.MCP, matches={e:v1, e:v2, e:v3})

An example MCP model can be found in the model library: `HANSMCP <https://github.com/GAMS-dev/gamspy/blob/master/tests/integration/models/hansmcp.py>`_.


Model Attributes
================

Models have attributes that store a variety of information, including

* information about the results of solving a model, the results of a solve, and the model’s solution,
* information about certain features to be used by GAMSPy or the solver,
* information passed to GAMSPy or the solver specifying various settings that are also available as option.

====================== ===========================
Model Attribute        Description
====================== ===========================
num_domain_violations  Number of domain violations
algorithm_time         Solver-dependent timing information
total_solve_time       Elapsed time it took to execute a solve statement in total
total_solver_time      Elapsed time taken by the solver only
num_iterations         Number of iterations used
marginals              Indicator for marginals present
max_infeasibility      Maximum of infeasibilities
mean_infeasibility     Mean of infeasibilities
status                 Integer number that indicates the model status
num_nodes_used         Number of nodes used by the MIP solver
solve_number           Number of the last solve
num_dependencies       Number of dependencies in a CNS model
num_discrete_variables Number of discrete variables
num_equations          Number of equations
num_infeasibilities    Number of infeasibilities
num_nonlinear_insts    Number of nonlinear instructions
num_nonlinear_zeros    Number of nonlinear nonzeros
num_nonoptimalities    Number of nonoptimalities
num_nonzeros           Number of nonzero entries in the model coefficient matrix
num_mcp_redefinitions  Number of MCP redefinitions
num_variables          Number of variables
num_bound_projections  Number of bound projections during model generation
objective_estimation   Estimate of the best possible solution for a mixed-integer model
objective_value        Objective function value
used_model_type        Integer number that indicates the used model type
model_generation_time  Time GAMS took to generate the model in wall-clock seconds
solve_model_time       Time the solver used to solve the model in seconds
sum_infeasibilities    Sum of infeasibilities
solve_status           Indicates the solver termination condition
solver_version         Solver version
====================== ===========================

Solving a Model
===============

The ``Model`` class has a function named :meth:`solve <gamspy.Model.solve>` that allows users to solve the specified model. ::

    from gamspy import Container, Variable, Equation, Model, Sense, Problem, Options

    m = Container()
    z = Variable(m, description="objective variable")
    e1 = Equation(m)
    e1[...] = ... # definition of the equation
    e2 = Equation(m)
    e2[...] = ... # definition of the equation
    
    model = Model(m, equations=[e1, e2], problem=Problem.LP, sense=Sense.MAX, objective=z)
    summary = model.solve(solver="conopt", options=Options(iteration_limit=2), solver_options={"rtmaxv": "1.e12"})

::

    In [1]: summary
    Out[1]:
      Solver Status   Model Status         Objective Num of Equations Num of Variables Model Type  Solver Solver Time
    0        Normal  OptimalGlobal  538.811203982966               74               78         LP  CONOPT        0.02

In most cases, calling the :meth:`solve <gamspy.Model.solve>` function without any parameters is sufficient. 
In this scenario, the default solver depending on the problem type, default options will be used. 
However, users who require more control can specify the solver, general options, and solver-specific 
options. All installed solvers on your system can be queried by running the following command: ::

    gamspy list solvers

To see all available solvers that can be installed and used, run the following command.::

    gamspy list solvers -a

:meth:`solve <gamspy.Model.solve>` function returns a Pandas DataFrame which contains the summary of the solve.  

Redirecting Output
------------------

The output of GAMSPy while solving the model can be redirected to a file, to standard input or to any 
custom stream that supports ``write`` and ``flush`` operations by specifying the ``output`` parameter in 
the :meth:`solve <gamspy.Model.solve>` function.::
    
    import sys
    from gamspy import Container, Variable, Equation, Model, Sense, Problem

    m = Container()
    z = Variable(m, description="objective variable")
    e1 = Equation(m)
    e1[...] = ... # definition of the equation
    e2 = Equation(m)
    e2[...] = ... # definition of the equation
    
    model = Model(m, equations=[e1, e2], problem=Problem.LP, sense=Sense.MAX, objective=z)
    
    # redirect output to stdout
    model.solve(output=sys.stdout)

    # redirect output to a file
    with open("my_out_file", "w") as file:
        model.solve(output=file)

    # redirect to custom stream
    class MyStream:
        def write(self, data):
            logger.info(data.strip())

        def flush(self): ...
    
    my_stream = MySteam()
    model.solve(output=my_stream)

Solving Locally
---------------

By default, models are solved locally (on your machine).

Solving with GAMS Engine
------------------------

Synchronous Solve
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In order to send your model to be solved with `GAMS Engine <https://www.gams.com/sales/engine_facts/>`_, 
you need to define the GAMS Engine configuration.
This can be done by importing ``EngineClient`` and creating an instance. The user can then pass this instance to the 
:meth:`solve <gamspy.Model.solve>` method and specify the backend as ``engine``. ::

    from gamspy import Container, Variable, Equation, Model, Sense, Problem, EngineClient

    m = Container()
    z = Variable(m, description="objective variable")
    e1 = Equation(m)
    e1[...] = ... # definition of the equation
    e2 = Equation(m)
    e2[...] = ... # definition of the equation
    
    model = Model(m, equations=[e1, e2], problem=Problem.LP, sense=Sense.MAX, objective=z)

    client = EngineClient(
        host=os.environ["ENGINE_URL"],
        username=os.environ["ENGINE_USER"],
        password=os.environ["ENGINE_PASSWORD"],
        namespace=os.environ["ENGINE_NAMESPACE"],
    )
    model.solve(solver="conopt", backend="engine", client=client)


Asynchronous Solve
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you just want to send your jobs to GAMS Engine without blocking until the results are received,
the `is_blocking` parameter can be set to `False` in `EngineClient`.

Tokens of the submitted jobs are stored in `client.tokens` ::

    client = EngineClient(
        host=os.environ["ENGINE_URL"],
        username=os.environ["ENGINE_USER"],
        password=os.environ["ENGINE_PASSWORD"],
        namespace=os.environ["ENGINE_NAMESPACE"],
        is_blocking=False,
    )

    for _ in range(3):
        ... # changes in your model
        model.solve(backend="engine", client=client)

    print(client.tokens) # This prints all tokens for the submitted jobs

The results of the non-blocking jobs can be retrieved later. For example if want to retrieve the results of the 
last submitted job, we can do that following: ::

    token = client.tokens[-1]
    client.job.get_results(token, working_directory="out_dir")

The results would be downloaded to the given working directory. The downloaded GDX file will have the same name with :meth:`gdxOutputPath <gamspy.Container.gdxOutputPath>`. 
Then, if one wants to read the results, they can simply create a new Container and read the results from the downloaded GDX 
file: ::

    gdx_out_path = os.path.join("out_dir", os.path.basename(m.gdxOutputPath()))
    solution_container = Container(load_from=gdx_out_path)


Solving with NEOS Server
------------------------

Synchronous Solve
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In order to send your model to be solved to `NEOS Server <https://neos-server.org/neos/>`_, you need to create a NeosClient.
This can be done by importing ``NeosClient`` and creating an instance. The user can then pass this instance to the 
:meth:`solve <gamspy.Model.solve>` method and specify the backend as ``neos``. ::

    from gamspy import Container, Variable, Equation, Model, Sense, Problem, NeosClient

    m = Container()
    z = Variable(m, description="objective variable")
    e1 = Equation(m)
    e1[...] = ... # definition of the equation
    e2 = Equation(m)
    e2[...] = ... # definition of the equation

    client = NeosClient(
        email=os.environ["NEOS_EMAIL"],
        username=os.environ["NEOS_USER"],
        password=os.environ["NEOS_PASSWORD"],
    )
    model.solve(backend="neos", client=client)

Providing your username and password is optional for the NEOS Server backend, but it is recommended 
as it allows you to review your models on the `NEOS web client <https://neos-server.org/neos/>`_. The
environment variables can be set in a `.env` file or with `export` statements on the command line. Example 
of running your model on NEOS Server without authentication: ::

    NEOS_EMAIL=<your_email> python <your_script>

If one wants to investigate the results later on NEOS Server web client, they can provide the username
and password in the same way: ::

    NEOS_EMAIL=<your_email> NEOS_USER=<your_username> NEOS_PASSWORD=<your_password> python <your_script>

Alternatively, the output of NEOS can be redirected to a file by specifying the output stream: ::

    model.solve(backend="neos", client=client, output=sys.stdout)

.. note::
    NEOS Server backend does not support loadpoint option and external equations at the moment.

Asynchronous Solve
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you just want to send your jobs to NEOS server without blocking until the results are received,
`is_blocking` parameter can be set to `False` in `NeosClient`.

All submitted jobs are stored in `client.jobs` in case you want to reach to the job numbers and job passwords
you already sent to the server. ::

    client = NeosClient(
        email=os.environ["NEOS_EMAIL"],
        username=os.environ["NEOS_USER"],
        password=os.environ["NEOS_PASSWORD"],
        is_blocking=False,
    )

    for _ in range(3):
        ... # changes in your model
        model.solve(backend="neos", client=client)

    print(client.jobs) # This prints all job numbers and jon passwords as a list of tuples

The results of the non-blocking jobs can be retrieved later. For example if want to retrieve the results of the 
last submitted job, we can do that following: ::

    job_number, job_password = client.jobs[-1]
    client.get_final_results(job_number, job_password)
    client.download_output(job_number, job_password, working_directory="my_out_directory")

The results would be downloaded to the given working directory. The downloaded gdx file will always have the name "output.gdx". 
Then, if one wants to read the results, they can simply create a new Container and read the results from the downloaded gdx 
file: ::

    solution_container = Container(load_from="my_out_directory/output.gdx")


The terms of use for NEOS can be found here: `Terms of use <https://neos-server.org/neos/termofuse.html>`_.

.. _solve_options:

Solve Options
-------------

Solve options can be specified using the :meth:`gamspy.Options` class. For example: ::

    from gamspy import Container, Variable, Equation, Model, Sense, Problem, Options

    m = Container()
    ... # Definition of your model
    model = Model(m, equations=m.getEquations(), problem=Problem.LP, sense=Sense.MAX, objective=z)
    model.solve(options=Options(iteration_limit=2))


Here is the list of options and their descriptions:

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Option                            | Description                                                                       | Possible Values                                                                           |
+===================================+===================================================================================+===========================================================================================+
| cns                               | Default cns solver                                                                | Any solver installed in your system that can solve cns                                    |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| dnlp                              | Default dnlp solver                                                               | Any solver installed in your system that can solve dnlp                                   |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| emp                               | Default emp solver                                                                | Any solver installed in your system that can solve emp                                    |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| lp                                | Default lp solver                                                                 | Any solver installed in your system that can solve lp                                     |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| mcp                               | Default mcp solver                                                                | Any solver installed in your system that can solve mcp                                    |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| minlp                             | Default minlp solver                                                              | Any solver installed in your system that can solve minlp                                  |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| mip                               | Default mip solver                                                                | Any solver installed in your system that can solve mip                                    |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| miqcp                             | Default miqcp solver                                                              | Any solver installed in your system that can solve miqcp                                  |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| mpec                              | Default mpec solver                                                               | Any solver installed in your system that can solve mpec                                   |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| nlp                               | Default nlp solver                                                                | Any solver installed in your system that can solve nlp                                    |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| qcp                               | Default qcp solver                                                                | Any solver installed in your system that can solve qcp                                    |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| rminlp                            | Default rminlp solver                                                             | Any solver installed in your system that can solve rminlp                                 |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| rmip                              | Default rmip solver                                                               | Any solver installed in your system that can solve rmip                                   |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| rmiqcp                            | Default rmiqcp solver                                                             | Any solver installed in your system that can solve rmiqcp                                 |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| rmpec                             | Default rmpec solver                                                              | Any solver installed in your system that can solve rmpec                                  |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| allow_suffix_in_equation          | Allow variables with suffixes in model algebra                                    | bool                                                                                      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| allow_suffix_in_limited_variables | Allow domain limited variables with suffixes in model                             | bool                                                                                      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| basis_detection_threshold         | Basis detection threshold                                                         | float                                                                                     |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| compile_error_limit               | Compile time error limit                                                          | int                                                                                       |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| domain_violation_limit            | Domain violation limit solver default                                             | int                                                                                       |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| generate_name_dict                | Makes names of variables and equations that have been generated by the solve      | bool                                                                                      |
|                                   | statement available to the solver                                                 |                                                                                           |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| enable_scaling                    | Determines whether to employ user-specified variable and equation scaling factors | bool                                                                                      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| enable_prior                      | Instructs the solver to use the priority branching information. If and how        | bool                                                                                      |
|                                   | priorities are used is solver-dependent.                                          |                                                                                           |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| bypass_solver                     | If True, GAMSPy does not pass the generated model to the solver.                  | bool                                                                                      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| hold_fixed_variables              | Treat fixed variables as constants                                                | bool                                                                                      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| iteration_limit                   | Iteration limit of solver                                                         | int                                                                                       |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| keep_temporary_files              | Controls keeping or deletion of process directory and scratch files               | bool                                                                                      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| listing_file                      | Listing file name                                                                 | Name of the listing file                                                                  |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| log_file                          | Log file name                                                                     | Name of the log file                                                                      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| variable_listing_limit            | Maximum number of columns listed in one variable block                            | int                                                                                       |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| equation_listing_limit            | Maximum number of rows listed in one equation block                               | int                                                                                       |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| node_limit                        | Node limit in branch and bound tree                                               | int                                                                                       |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| absolute_optimality_gap           | Absolute Optimality criterion solver default                                      | float                                                                                     |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| relative_optimality_gap           | Relative Optimality criterion solver default                                      | float                                                                                     |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| memory_tick_interval              | Wait interval between memory monitor checks: ticks = milliseconds                 | float                                                                                     |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| monitor_process_tree_memory       | Monitor the memory used by the GAMS process tree                                  | bool                                                                                      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| profile                           | Execution profiling                                                               | 0: No profiling                                                                           |
|                                   |                                                                                   |                                                                                           |
|                                   |                                                                                   | 1: Minimum profiling                                                                      |
|                                   |                                                                                   |                                                                                           |
|                                   |                                                                                   | 2: Profiling depth for nested control structures                                          |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| profile_file                      | Write profile information to this file                                            | str                                                                                       |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| profile_tolerance                 | Minimum time a statement must use to appear in profile generated output           | float                                                                                     |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| reference_file                    | Symbol reference file                                                             | str                                                                                       |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| time_limit                        | Wall-clock time limit for solver                                                  | float                                                                                     |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| savepoint                         | Save solver point in GDX file                                                     | 0: No point GDX file is to be saved                                                       |
|                                   |                                                                                   |                                                                                           |
|                                   |                                                                                   | 1: A point GDX file from the last solve is to be saved                                    |
|                                   |                                                                                   |                                                                                           |
|                                   |                                                                                   | 2: A point GDX file from every solve is to be saved                                       |
|                                   |                                                                                   |                                                                                           |
|                                   |                                                                                   | 3: A point GDX file from the last solve is to be saved                                    |
|                                   |                                                                                   |                                                                                           |
|                                   |                                                                                   | 4: A point GDX file from every solve is to be saved                                       |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| seed                              | Random number seed                                                                | int                                                                                       |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| report_solution                   | Solution report print option                                                      | 0: Remove solution listings following solves                                              |
|                                   |                                                                                   |                                                                                           |
|                                   |                                                                                   | 1: Include solution listings following solves                                             |
|                                   |                                                                                   |                                                                                           |
|                                   |                                                                                   | 2: Suppress all solution information                                                      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| show_os_memory                    |                                                                                   | 0: Show memory reported by internal accounting                                            |
|                                   |                                                                                   |                                                                                           |
|                                   |                                                                                   | 1: Show resident set size reported by operating system                                    |
|                                   |                                                                                   |                                                                                           |
|                                   |                                                                                   | 2: Show virtual set size reported by operating system                                     |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| solve_link_type                   | Solve link option                                                                 | "disk": The model instance is saved to the scratch directory,                             |
|                                   |                                                                                   | "memory": The model instance is passed to the solver in-memory                            |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| multi_solve_strategy              | Multiple solve management                                                         | "replace" | "merge" | "clear"                                                             |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| step_summary                      | Summary of computing resources used by job steps                                  | bool                                                                                      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| suppress_compiler_listing         | Compiler listing option                                                           | bool                                                                                      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| report_solver_status              | Solver Status file reporting option                                               | bool                                                                                      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| threads                           | Number of threads to be used by a solver                                          | int                                                                                       |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| write_listing_file                | Controls listing file creation                                                    | bool                                                                                      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| zero_rounding_threshold           | The results of certain operations will be set to zero if abs(result) LE ZeroRes   | float                                                                                     |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| report_underflow                  | Report underflow as a warning when abs(results) LE ZeroRes and result set to zero | bool                                                                                      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

To check all available options, see :meth:`gamspy.Options`.

Solver Options
--------------

In addition to solve options, user can specify solver options as a dictionary.::
    
    from gamspy import Container, Variable, Equation, Model, Sense, Problem

    m = Container()
    ... # Definition of your model
    model = Model(m, equations=m.getEquations(), problem=Problem.LP, sense=Sense.MAX, objective=z)
    model.solve(solver="conopt", solver_options={"rtmaxv": "1.e12"})

    
For all possible solver options, please check the corresponding `solver manual <https://www.gams.com/latest/docs/S_MAIN.html>`_

Exporting Model To LaTeX
========================
GAMSPy models can be exported to a `.tex` file in LaTeX format by using the :meth:`toLatex <gamspy.Model.toLatex>` function of the model.
The generated `.tex` file can be automatically compiled into a PDF file by using ``pdflatex`` ::

    from gamspy import Container, Variable, Equation, Model, Sense, Problem

    m = Container()
    ... # Definition of your model    
    model = Model(m, equations=m.getEquations(), problem=Problem.LP, sense=Sense.MAX, objective=z)
    model.toLatex(path=<latex_path>, generate_pdf=True)

.. note::
    To generate a PDF file from a `.tex` file, you must install `pdflatex` on your system and add it to your `PATH`. 
    The :meth:`toLatex <gamspy.Model.toLatex>` function uses the *names* of the GAMSPy symbols. If names are not
    supplied, GAMSPy invents (ugly) names which would show up in the LaTeX source. So for this feature to be useful
    the GAMSPy set, parameter, variable, and equations should be specified with a name.

Limiting Domain for Variables
=============================

It is possible to limit the domain of variables used in a model in the `Model` constructor. This allows to restrict the 
generation of blocks of variables in a single place instead of using, e.g., `where` statements at every place where 
this variable block is used in equations. 

The following examples are based on the `transportation model <https://github.com/GAMS-dev/gamspy-examples/blob/master/models/trnsport/trnsport.py>`_. 
To limit the transportation network in that model to certain links (e.g. because some are blocked because of some reason) one could introduce a subset 
of the possible links and use that with `where` conditions (equation `supply`) or indexing a subset (equation `demand`) in the equations like this:

.. code-block:: python

    import gamspy as gp

    # Define symbols here
    ...

    # Initialize whole network as free
    free_links = gp.Set(
        m, domain=[i,j], description="usable links in the network", 
        records=i.toList() + j.toList()
    )
    cost[...] = z == gp.Sum((i,j), (c[i,j] * x[i,j]).where[free_links[i,j]])
    supply[i] = gp.Sum(j, x[i,j].where[free_links[i,j]]) <= a[i] 
    demand[j] = gp.Sum(free_links[i,j], x[i,j]) >= b[j]

    # Block a particular link
    free_links['san-diego','topeka'] = False

    transport = gp.Model(
        m, equations=m.getEquations(), problem="LP", 
        sense="MIN", objective=z
    )
    transport.solve()

Instead of adding the `where` condition or index subset to each appearance of x in the model, one could simply add a domain restriction 
for that variable to the model statement directly by specifying a variable and the set that limits its domain. Using 
this approach, the previous example looks like the following:

.. code-block:: python

    import gamspy as gp

    # Define symbols here
    ...

    # Initialize whole network as free
    free_links = gp.Set(
        m, domain=[i,j], description="usable links in the network", 
        records=i.toList() + j.toList()
    )
    cost[...] = z == gp.Sum((i,j), c[i,j] * x[i,j])
    supply[i] = gp.Sum(j, x[i,j]) <= a[i] 
    demand[j] = gp.Sum(i, x[i,j]) >= b[j]

    # Block a particular link
    free_links['san-diego','topeka'] = False

    transport = gp.Model(
        m, limited_variables=[x[free_links]], equations=m.getEquations(), 
        problem="LP", sense="MIN", objective=z
    )
    transport.solve()
