.. _parameter:

.. meta::
   :description: Documentation of GAMSPy Parameter (gamspy.Parameter)
   :keywords: Parameter, GAMSPy, gamspy, mathematical modeling, sparsity, performance

*********
Parameter
*********

One very important principle will motivate all our discussions on data:

.. note::
    Data should be entered in its simplest form, and each data item should only be 
    entered once.

This principle is adopted for two main reasons: Numbers are likely to change, and when 
they do, it's important to make the process of updating them as easy and safe as 
possible. We also want to make our model easy for others to read and understand. 
Keeping the amount of data as small as possible will certainly help. The reader should 
always be kept aware of all the assumptions made during data manipulation in order to be 
able to reproduce the results of a study.

This chapter deals with the data type *parameter*.


Scalar Parameters
=================

A GAMSPy parameter with zero dimensionality or emtpy domain (``domain=[]``) is called a *scalar*. This means that there are 
no associated sets, so there is exactly one number associated with the parameter: ::

    from gamspy import Container, Parameter

    m = Container()
    rho = Parameter(m, "rho", records=0.15)
    irr = Parameter(m, "irr")
    life = Parameter(m, "life", records=20)

The statement above initializes ``rho`` and ``life``, but not ``irr``. Assignment statement or 
the :meth:`setRecords <gamspy.Parameter.setRecords>` function can be used to provide a value for a scalar: ::

    irr[...] = 0.07
    irr.setRecords(0.08)

.. note::
    Assignment statements to scalar parameters need the ellipsis ``[...]`` as the index. 
    This is necessary to prevent Python to override the symbol with the given value.  


Higher Dimensional Parameters
=============================

Higher dimensional GAMSPy parameters are indexed over one or more sets. The data records in the
constructor, the :meth:`addParameter <gamspy.Container.addParameter>` function, or the 
:meth:`setRecords <gamspy.Parameter.setRecords>` function needs to be in a list-like format.
The `GAMS Transfer Python documentation <https://www.gams.com/latest/docs/API_PY_GAMSTRANSFER_MAIN_CLASSES.html#PY_GAMSTRANSFER_ADD_PARAMETER_RECORDS>`_  gives many examples including lists, pandas dataframe,
numpy matrix, etc.

The Syntax
----------

The following example illustrates the parameter statement ::

    from gamspy import Container, Set, Parameter

    m = Container()
    j = Set(m, "j", description="markets")
    dd = Parameter(
        m,
        name="dd",
        domain=j,
        description="distribution of demand",
        domain_forwarding=True,
        records=[["mexico-df", 55], ["guadalajara", 15]],
    )

The class :meth:`Parameter <gamspy.Parameter>` indicates that this is a parameter statement and 
``name = "dd"`` is the internal name of the parameter in GAMSPy, it is an *identifier*.
If the name is not provided, it will be autogenerated. A parameter may be defined over 
one or more sets that may be specified in the ``domain`` list. The domain specification 
for the parameter ``dd`` means that there will be a vector of data associated with it, 
one number corresponding to every member of the set ``j``. The optional description is 
used to describe the parameter.

The Parameter initialization requires a list of data elements, each consisting of a 
label or label-tuple and a value. The label is an element of the defining set or - if 
there is more than one defining set - a combination of the elements of the defining 
sets. The referenced set elements must belong to the set that the parameter is indexed 
over. Finally, the value assigned to the record defined by the set element or element 
tuple. 

Besides using the :meth:`Parameter <gamspy.Parameter>` class directly, one can also facilitate the 
:meth:`addParameter <gamspy.Container.addParameter>` method of the :meth:`Container <gamspy.Container>` class: ::

    dd = m.addParameter(
        "dd",
        domain=j,
        description="distribution of demand",
        domain_forwarding=True,
        records=[["mexico-df", 55], ["guadalajara", 15]],
    )


Parameter Data for Higher Dimensions
------------------------------------

A parameter may have several dimensions. GAMSPy parameters can
have up to 20 dimensions. The list oriented data initialization through the parameter 
statement can be easily extended to data of higher dimensionality. The label that 
appears in the one-dimensional case is replaced by a tuple of labels for higher dimensions. 
Just like in the case of :ref:`multi-dimensional-sets`, the elements in the :math:`n`-tuple 
can be created using various Python structures: ::

    from gamspy import Container, Set, Parameter

    m = Container()
    i = Set(m, "i")
    j = Set(m, "j")
    a = Parameter(
        m,
        domain=[i, j],
        domain_forwarding=True,
        records=[
            ("seattle", "new-york", 2.5),
            ("seattle", "chicago", 1.7),
            ("seattle", "topeka", 1.8),
            ("san-diego", "new-york", 2.5),
            ("san-diego", "chicago", 1.8),
            ("san-diego", "topeka", 1.4),
        ],
    )

::

    In [1]: a.records
    Out[1]:
    	        i	       j	value
    0	  seattle	new-york	  2.5
    1	  seattle	 chicago	  1.7
    2	  seattle	  topeka	  1.8
    3	san-diego	new-york	  2.5
    4	san-diego	 chicago	  1.8
    5	san-diego	  topeka	  1.4


It is also possible to define an empty parameter at declaration and fill it with data 
(e.g. from other sources like databases or spreadsheets) later on using the 
:meth:`setRecords <gamspy.Parameter.setRecords>` method of the :meth:`Parameter <gamspy.Parameter>` class: ::

    b = Parameter(m, domain=[i, j])
    b.setRecords(a.records)

The records of the parameter can be filtered with the following syntax: ::

    In [1]: a[i,'new-york'].records
    Out[1]:
    	        i	       j	value
    0	  seattle	new-york	  2.5
    3	san-diego	new-york	  2.5

This example gathers records only where the element of set `j` is `new-york`.

The Assignment Statement
========================

The assignment statement is the fundamental data manipulation statement in GAMSPy. 
It may be used to define or alter values associated with :ref:`sets <gams_set>`, 
:ref:`variables <variable>`, :ref:`parameters <parameter>` or :ref:`equations <equation>`.

Scalar Assignments
------------------

Consider the following artificial sequence: ::

    x = Parameter(m, "x", records=1.5)
    x[...] = 1.2
    x[...] = x + 2

The scalar ``x`` is initialized to be 1.5. The second statement changes the value to 
1.2, and the third changes it to 3.2. The second and third statements are *assignments*: 
each replaces the current value of x with a new one.

Note that, as mentioned above, when assigning values to scalar parameters, one 
needs to provide the ellipsis literal ``[...]``. This is not necessary for 
non-scalar parameters. 

Note also that the same symbol can be used on the left and right of the ``=`` sign.

Indexed Assignments
-------------------

Performing indexed assignments offers what may be thought of as simultaneous or 
parallel assignments and provides a concise way of manipulating large amounts of data.

Consider the mathematical statement :math:`DJ_d = 2.75 * DA_d` for all elements of 
:math:`d`. This means that for every member of the set :math:`d`, a value is assigned 
to :math:`DJ`. This can be written in GAMSPy as follows: ::

    dj[d] = 2.75*da[d]

This assignment is known technically as an *indexed assignment* and set ``d`` as the
controlling index or controlling set. 

.. note::
    The index set(s) on the left hand side of an indexed assignment are referred to 
    synonymously as the *controlling indices*, *controlling sets*, or 
    *controlling domain* of the assignment.

The extension to two or more controlling indices should be obvious. There will be an 
assignment made for each label combination that can be constructed using the indices 
inside the parentheses. Consider the following example of an assignment to all 100 
data elements of the parameter ``a``. ::

    from gamspy import Container, Set, Parameter

    m = Container()
    row = Set(m, "row")
    col = Set(m, "col")
    
    r = Parameter(
        m,
        domain=row,
        domain_forwarding=True,
        records=[(f"r-{r}", 4) for r in range(7)]
        + [(f"r-{r}", 5) for r in range(7, 10)],
    )
    c = Parameter(
        m,
        domain=col,
        domain_forwarding=True,
        records=[(f"c-{c}", 3) for c in range(5)]
        + [(f"c-{c}", 5) for c in range(5, 10)],
    )
    
    a = Parameter(m, domain=[row, col])
    a[row, col]  =  13.2 + r[row]*c[col]

The calculation in the last statement is carried out for each of the 100 unique 
two-label combinations that can be formed from the elements of ``row`` and ``col``. 
An explicit formulation of the first of these assignments follows: ::

    a["r-0", "c-0"] = 100 + r["r-0"]*c["c-0"]

::

    In [1]: a.pivot()
    Out[1]:
           c-0   c-1   c-2   c-3   c-4   c-5   c-6   c-7   c-8   c-9
    r-0  112.0  25.2  25.2  25.2  25.2  33.2  33.2  33.2  33.2  33.2
    r-1   25.2  25.2  25.2  25.2  25.2  33.2  33.2  33.2  33.2  33.2
    r-2   25.2  25.2  25.2  25.2  25.2  33.2  33.2  33.2  33.2  33.2
    r-3   25.2  25.2  25.2  25.2  25.2  33.2  33.2  33.2  33.2  33.2
    r-4   25.2  25.2  25.2  25.2  25.2  33.2  33.2  33.2  33.2  33.2
    r-5   25.2  25.2  25.2  25.2  25.2  33.2  33.2  33.2  33.2  33.2
    r-6   25.2  25.2  25.2  25.2  25.2  33.2  33.2  33.2  33.2  33.2
    r-7   28.2  28.2  28.2  28.2  28.2  38.2  38.2  38.2  38.2  38.2
    r-8   28.2  28.2  28.2  28.2  28.2  38.2  38.2  38.2  38.2  38.2
    r-9   28.2  28.2  28.2  28.2  28.2  38.2  38.2  38.2  38.2  38.2

Note that for indexed assignments a copy of the symbols on the right hand side 
is installed before the assignment is carried out. That means it does not work 
"in-place" or recursively. Consider the following example where we compute the 
first ten Fibonacci numbers and store them in parameter ``f`` using a loop. The 
example also illustrates how such a recursive calculation does not work with a 
parallel assignment statement for parameter ``g``. ::
    
    from gamspy import Container, Set, Parameter, Ord

    m = Container()
    i = Set(m, "i", records=[f"i{i}" for i in range(11)])
    
    f = Parameter(m, "f", domain=i, records=[("i0", 0), ("i1", 1)])
    g = Parameter(m, "g", domain=i, records=f.records)    
    
    for idx in range(2, 11):
        f[f"i{idx}"] = f[f"i{idx-1}"] + f[f"i{idx-2}"]

    g[i].where[Ord(i)>=3] = g[i.lag(1)] + g[i.lag(2)]


Resulting in the following output ::

    In [1]: f.records
    Out[1]:
          i  value
    0    i0   -0.0
    1    i1    1.0
    2    i2    1.0
    3    i3    2.0
    4    i4    3.0
    5    i5    5.0
    6    i6    8.0
    7    i7   13.0
    8    i8   21.0
    9    i9   34.0
    10  i10   55.0

    In [2]: g.records
    Out[2]:
          i  value
    0    i0   -0.0
    1    i1    1.0
    2    i2    1.0
    3    i3    1.0

Not only are many elements missing from ``g``, the element ``g['i3']`` is wrong. The reason for this is
that the copy of ``g`` made at the beginning of the assignment consists of elements for ``i0`` and ``i1``
only. The calculation for ``i3`` uses ``g['i1'] + g['i2']``. ``g['i2']`` is still 0 and hence we end up
with ``g['i3'] = 1``. The example, uses of :meth:`Ord <gamspy.Ord>` and :meth:`Lag <gamspy.Set.lag>`
operations.

.. note::
    There are many math functions that can be used in assignments provided by GAMSPy. The whole list can 
    be found at :meth:`gamspy.math<gamspy.math>`. More information about each function can be found at 
    `functions <https://gams.com/latest/docs/UG_Parameters.html#UG_Parameters_Functions>` documentation of
    GAMS.

Restricting the Domain in Assignments
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Sometimes it is necessary to make assignments over selected elements of a set instead 
of over the entire domain. There are several ways to accomplish this: using 
explicit labels, subsets, conditionals and tuples. 
Before we look at each method in more detail, below is an introductory example: ::

    from gamspy import Container, Set, Parameter

    m = Container()
    
    # Set with element range from "i0" to "i100"
    i = Set(m, "i", records=[(f"i{i}", i) for i in range(101)]) 
    k = Parameter(m, domain=i)

    # Assign 4 to all elements of k[i]
    k[i] = 4
    
    # Assign 15 to the specific elements of k['i77']
    k["i77"] = 15

    # Assign 10 to the first 10 elements of i to k[i]
    j = Set(m, "j", domain=i, records=i.records[0:8])
    k[j] = 10

The parameter ``k`` is declared over the set ``i`` but not assigned any values 
at first. In the first assignment statement ``k[i] = 4``
all elements of the set ``i`` are assigned the value 4. ``k["i77"]`` refers to 
a specific set elements and is assigned the value 15. The third assignment assignes 
the value 10 to the first 8 elements of the set ``i`` by using a subset ``j``. Read 
more about Set and Set Element Referencing here: 
:ref:`set-and-set-element-referencing`.


Explicit Labels
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The strongest restriction of the domain is assigning a value to just one element. 
Labels may be used explicitly in the context of assignments to accomplish this. 
The following example illustrates: ::

    a["r-7", "c-4"] = -2.36

This statement assigns a constant value to just one element of the parameter ``a``. 
All other elements of ``a`` remain unchanged. Labels must be quoted when used in 
this way.

Subsets
^^^^^^^

In general, wherever a set name may occur in an indexed assignment, a subset 
may be used instead.

Consider the following example: ::

    sro = Set(m, domain=row, records=row.records[-4:])
    a[sro, "col-9"] = 2.44 -33*r[sro]

Since the set ``sro`` was declared as a subset of the set ``row``, we can use 
``sro`` as a controlling index in the assignment above to make the assignment 
only for the elements of ``sro``.

.. _restricting-the-domain-conditionals:

Conditionals
^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

    a[row, col].where[a[row, col] >= 100] = float("inf")

This assignment has the following effect: all elements of the parameter ``a`` 
whose value was at least 100 are assigned the value ``float("inf")``, while all other elements 
of ``a`` remain unchanged.

.. _restricting-the-domain-tuples:

Tuples
^^^^^^

Tuples or multi-dimensional sets are introduced in section 
:ref:`multi-dimensional-sets`. In this simple example we show how they may be used 
to restrict the domain. The example builds on a previous example in this section. 
We repeat the whole code here for clarity. ::

    from gamspy import Container, Set, Parameter

    m = Container()
    row = Set(m, "row")
    col = Set(m, "col")

    r = Parameter(
        m,
        domain=row,
        domain_forwarding=True,
        records=[(f"r-{r}", 4) for r in range(7)] + [(f"r-{r}", 5) for r in range(7, 10)],
    )
    c = Parameter(
        m,
        domain=col,
        domain_forwarding=True,
        records=[(f"c-{c}", 3) for c in range(5)] + [(f"c-{c}", 5) for c in range(5, 10)],
    )

    tuples = Set(
        m,
        domain=[row, col],
        records=[("r-0", "c-0"), ("r-0", "c-9"), ("r-9", "c-0"), ("r-9", "c-9")],
    )

    a = Parameter(m, domain=[row, col])
    a[row, col] = 13.2 + r[row] * c[col]
    a[tuples[row, col]] = 7 + r[row] * c[col]
    a[tuples] = 0.25 * a[tuples]

Note that we have introduced the new set ``tuples``. It is two-dimensional and contains 
just four elements. As before, the parameter ``a`` is first assigned values for all its 
100 elements. We then change some of these values using the set ``tuples`` as domain. 
The values of the elements of the parameter ``a`` that are not elements of the set ``tuples`` 
remain unchanged.

Issues with Controlling Indices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. warning::
    The number of controlling indices on the left of the = sign should be at least as 
    large as the number of indices on the right. There should be no index on the right-hand 
    side of the assignment that is not present on the left unless it is operated on by an 
    indexed operator. For more on indexed operators, see section :ref:`indexed-operations`.

Consider the following statement: ::

    a[row, "col-2"] = 22 - c[col]

GAMSPy will flag this statement as an error since ``col`` is an index on the right-hand side 
of the equation but not on the left. 

Note that there would be no error here if ``col`` were a singleton set. Since there is only 
one element in a singleton set, the intent and behavior is well-defined even when col is not 
under control.

.. warning::
    Each set is counted only once to determine the number of controlling indices. If the 
    intent is for a set to appear independently more than once within the controlling domain, 
    the second and subsequent occurrences of the set should be aliases of the original set, 
    so that the number of controlling indices is equal to the number of indices. For details 
    on aliases, see section :ref:`alias`.

Consider the following statement as an illustration: ::

    b[row, row] = 7.7 - r[row]

This statement has only one controlling index, namely ``row``. One element (on the diagonal 
of ``b``) is assigned for each element of ``row``, for a total of 10 assigned values. None 
of the off-diagonal elements of ``b`` will be changed!

If the intent is to assign values to each element of ``b``, this can be done by introducing 
an alias ``rowp`` for ``row`` and using this alias in the second index position. There will 
then be two controlling indices and GAMSPy will make assignments over all 100 values of the 
full Cartesian product. The following example illustrates this method: ::

    rowp = Alias(m, name="rowp", alias_with=row)
    b[row, rowp] = 7.7 - [r[row] + r[rowp]]/2


.. _indexed-operations:

Indexed Operations
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

GAMSPy provides the following four indexed operations: :meth:`Sum <gamspy.Sum>`, 
:meth:`Product <gamspy.Product>`, :meth:`Smax <gamspy.Smax>`, :meth:`Smin <gamspy.Smin>`, :meth:`Sand <gamspy.Sand>`, and :meth:`Sor <gamspy.Sor>`. These operations are 
performed over one or more controlling indices. Consider the following simple example: ::

    from gamspy import Container, Set, Parameter, Sum, Smax

    m = Container()
    i = Set(m, "i", description="plants")
    p = Set(m, "p", description="product")

    capacity = Parameter(
        m,
        domain=[i, p],
        description="capacity in tons per day",
        domain_forwarding=True,
        records=[
            ["cartagena", "nitr-acid", 10],
            ["cartagena", "sulf-acid", 20],
            ["cartagena", "amm-sulf", 30],
            ["callao", "nitr-acid", 20],
            ["callao", "sulf-acid", 30],
            ["callao", "amm-sulf", 40],
            ["moron", "nitr-acid", 30],
            ["moron", "sulf-acid", 40],
            ["moron", "amm-sulf", 50],
        ],
    )

    totcap = Parameter(m, domain=p, description="total capacity by process")
    totcap[p] = Sum(i, capacity[i, p])

The index over which the summation is done, ``i``, is separated from the word ``Sum`` 
by a left bracket and from the data term capacity[i,m] by a comma. The set ``i`` is called 
the *controlling index* for this operation. The scope of the control is the pair of 
brackets ``[]`` that start immediately after the Sum. Note that using normal mathematical 
representation the last line could be written as: :math:`totC_p = \sum_{i}C_{ip}`.

.. note::

    Notice that :meth:`Sum <gamspy.Sum>` is different than builtin `sum <https://docs.python.org/3/library/functions.html#sum>`_ 
    operation of Python.

It is also possible to sum simultaneously over the domain of two or more sets as in the 
first assignment that follows. The second assignment demonstrates the use of a less trivial 
expression than an identifier within the indexed operation. ::

    total_capacity = Parameter(m)
    total_capacity[...] = Sum((i, p), capacity[i, p]) # or Sum(p, totcap[p])

The equivalent mathematical forms are:

:math:`total\_capacity = \sum_{i}\sum_{p}capacity_{ip}` or :math:`total\_capacity = \sum_{p}totcap_{p}`

Note that the following alternative notation may be used for the first assignment above: ::

    total_capacity[...] = Sum(i, Sum(p, capacity[i, p]))

.. note::
    In the context of sets the :meth:`Sum <gamspy.Sum>` operator may be used to compute the 
    number of elements in a set. 

The :meth:`Smin <gamspy.Smin>` and :meth:`Smax <gamspy.Smax>` operations are used to find the largest 
and smallest values over the domain of the index set or sets. The index for the ``Smin`` 
and ``Smax`` operators is specified in the same manner as in the index for the 
:meth:`Sum <gamspy.Sum>` operator. In the following example we want to find the largest 
capacity: ::

    max_cap = Parameter(m)
    max_cap[...] = Smax((i, p), capacity[i,p])

The :meth:`Sand <gamspy.Sand>` and :meth:`Sor <gamspy.Sor>` operations are used for boolean `and` 
and `or` calculation over the domain of the index set or sets. The index for the ``Sand`` 
and ``Sor`` operators is specified in the same manner as in the index for the 
:meth:`Sum <gamspy.Sum>` operator. In the following example we represent a (random) boolean expression
in conjunctive normal form (CNF) using numerical data and check if some (random) configuration of the
boolean varibales satisfies the boolean expression: ::

    import gamspy as gp
    
    m = gp.Container()
    c = gp.Set(m, "c", description="conjunctions", records=range(6))
    j = gp.Set(m, "j", records=range(5))
    cnf = gp.Parameter(m, domain=[c, j], description="conjunctive normal form 1: A, -1: ~A")
    cnf[c,j].where[gp.math.uniform(0,1)<0.5] = 2*gp.math.uniformInt(0,1) - 1
    conf = gp.Parameter(m, domain=j)
    conf[j] = gp.math.uniformInt(0,1)
    result = gp.Parameter(m)

    result[:] = gp.Sand(
        c,
        gp.Sor(j.where[cnf[c, j] > 0], conf[j]) | gp.Sor(j.where[cnf[c, j] < 0], ~conf[j]),
    )
    result.records

.. note::
    - In the context of assignment statements, the attributes of variables and equations 
      (e.g. :meth:`gamspy.Variable.up`) may be used in indexed operations just as scalars 
      and parameters are used. For more on variable and equations attributes, see sections 
      :ref:`variable-attributes` and :ref:`equation-attributes` respectively.
    - In the context of equation definitions, scalars, parameters and variables may appear 
      freely in indexed operations. For more on equation definitions, see section :ref:`Defining Equations <equation_definition>`.

An altenative syntax for these operations is as follows:

.. tab-set:: 

    .. tab-item:: Alternative
    
        .. code-block:: python

            from gamspy import Container, Set, Parameter, Sum, Smax

            m = Container()
            i = Set(m, "i", description="plants")
            p = Set(m, "p", description="product")

            capacity = Parameter(
                m,
                domain=[i, p],
                description="capacity in tons per day",
                domain_forwarding=True,
                records=[
                    ["cartagena", "nitr-acid", 10],
                    ["cartagena", "sulf-acid", 20],
                    ["cartagena", "amm-sulf", 30],
                    ["callao", "nitr-acid", 20],
                    ["callao", "sulf-acid", 30],
                    ["callao", "amm-sulf", 40],
                    ["moron", "nitr-acid", 30],
                    ["moron", "sulf-acid", 40],
                    ["moron", "amm-sulf", 50],
                ],
            )

            totcap = Parameter(m, domain=p, description="total capacity by process")
            totcap[p] = capacity.sum(i)

    .. tab-item:: Original

        .. code-block:: python

            from gamspy import Container, Set, Parameter, Sum, Smax

            m = Container()
            i = Set(m, "i", description="plants")
            p = Set(m, "p", description="product")

            capacity = Parameter(
                m,
                domain=[i, p],
                description="capacity in tons per day",
                domain_forwarding=True,
                records=[
                    ["cartagena", "nitr-acid", 10],
                    ["cartagena", "sulf-acid", 20],
                    ["cartagena", "amm-sulf", 30],
                    ["callao", "nitr-acid", 20],
                    ["callao", "sulf-acid", 30],
                    ["callao", "amm-sulf", 40],
                    ["moron", "nitr-acid", 30],
                    ["moron", "sulf-acid", 40],
                    ["moron", "amm-sulf", 50],
                ],
            )

            totcap = Parameter(m, domain=p, description="total capacity by process")
            totcap[p] = Sum(i, capacity[i, p])

The assignment to the totcap parameter shows two different ways of writing an operation. 
While the original way uses the :meth:`Sum <gamspy.Sum>` class of GAMSPy, the alternative way uses the :meth:`sum <gamspy.Parameter.sum>` function 
call of the parameter. The arguments of the :meth:`sum <gamspy.Parameter.sum>` function are the control indices of the operation. 
In the example above, `capacity.sum(i)` means sum capacity over the `i` index. This syntax is available for all operation types, namely 
:meth:`Sum <gamspy.Sum>`, :meth:`Product <gamspy.Product>`, :meth:`Smin <gamspy.Smin>`, :meth:`Smax <gamspy.Smax>`, :meth:`Sand <gamspy.Sand>`, and :meth:`Sor <gamspy.Sor>`.
